an honor and a pleasure to be talking to
you all today um I'm uh both a a friend
of David's and an Admire of his work and
so to this is really meaningful for me
uh I should say that you know my uh day
job is working for a nonprofit called
the Electronic Frontier Foundation that
works to defend digital human rights but
I'm not speaking on their behalf today
unless you agree with what I say in
which case I'm definitely speaking on
their behalf uh so one of the premises I
think of eff and the the work that we do
is that there was an old good internet
um not a perfect internet but a a good
internet and and I want to talk about
what I mean by that and then what
happened and then what I think we can do
to make a new good internet so as a as a
kind of case study here just want to
briefly talk about Google um now you
know Google is obviously just been
convicted uh of uh being an illegal
monopolist here in the United States uh
their conduct has been atrocious in many
ways and not just recently but going
back a long time but if you're old
enough to remember there was a time when
finding things on the internet was hard
and then it got not just easier but kind
of magically easier right all of a
sudden it was possible to just type
things into a search box and have pretty
much the thing you were looking for show
up in an ey blink uh and that was a a
very exciting moment for those of us
who'd been using altav Vista or ases or
ways or these other services Yahoo
search that that predated it and and
Google did some really interesting
technical things in order to make that
happen the most important thing they did
was adopt something out of Academia
called citation analysis where they
reasoned look you know
people on the web make links to each
other's web pages and the reason they do
that is they think there is something
noteworthy about a web page right maybe
it's important enough to uh call
people's attention to because it's right
or maybe you know it's important enough
to call people's attention to because
it's wrong but either way it is
significant and that is why people make
links between web pages and so if you
want to know which web pages are most
important you can count all the links
that point at them now this is more or
less how academic publishing Works um
when someone publishes a paper in a
journal uh one of the ways you know
whether or not that paper was successful
is by measuring something called its
impact factor uh which is basically how
many times it gets cited uh run through
a bit of a filter that also analyzes
where it gets cited uh whether it's
cited in a journal that people cite a
lot of things from or a journal that is
uh not widely cited itself and so
therefore might be considered to be a
lowquality citation so so something in
nature citing something else in nature
is considered pretty influential
especially if lots of P papers in nature
cite something from nature or science or
any of the other big journals and so
this is a way that academics measure you
know whether they're changing the world
with their scholarship whether their
scholarship matters and so that's what
Google was trying to figure out is What
mattered and it turned out that a lot of
What mattered back then was what we
might call the weird web uh there was a
lot of stuff that was quite Homespun
produced by by individuals and small
groups who really wanted
to carry on honest dialogue with one
another a lot of them were bloggers some
of them were on message boards and so on
but by and large Google found you a lot
of really authentic stuff um spammers
now noticed that if you had links
pointed at our website that Google would
rank it highly and that a lot of people
were taking Google as their first and
often their only Port of Call for
finding things on the web and it turns
out making links between web pages that
are um unimportant or not worthy of
anyone's notice is not hard right the
only reason no one had ever done it um
in this inorganic way before is because
there's no reason to do it so Google had
to kind of armor itself against spammers
who did inauthentic things with links
they created these link farms and
linking rings and so on but Google
fought a pretty good fight I mean there
was a long period where the spammers
were losing and Google was winning and
today uh Google sucks
I mean I'm sure you've you've noticed
this right that that when you go to
Google despite Google having access to a
lot more money than it's ever had a lot
more Engineers than it's ever had um
Cozier relationships with World
governments that give it access to all
kinds of surveillance data um access to
private data Brokers that give it all
kinds of uh um uh uh uh data that it
could use to um sort spam from not spam
that Google's results are just terrible
and not only that but you know the
inauthentic inorganic things that start
about halfway down the page or even
lower that the spammers are trick Google
to show arrive below a half a page of
inorganic inauthentic things that Google
has been paid to show you right just
very bad ads so what happened to Google
well we can we can talk about um how
Google grew over the years um Google
calls itself an idea Factory um the
register a great sort of tech critical
online site that's been around for a
million years uh they call Google the
Chocolate Factory because of Google's
self-styled kind of Willy Wonka identity
and it's true Google's got a big R&D lab
and they've got a a division called X
division where they do moonshot projects
um but uh when you actually look at
where Google's growth has come from it
hasn't come from products that Google
developed on its own in fact as a share
of its turnover its R&D budg is really
rather small uh especially compared to
Historic high-tech companies like say
Bell Labs Google doesn't do a lot of R&D
and what it does doesn't produce much of
note if you look at all the products
that Google has had that are successful
the in-house products are Google search
and then there's kind of a half a
product right which is um uh uh Google
uh mail Gmail which was just a clone of
hot mail
um and um everything else is something
that they bought from someone else right
so their mobile stack right bought from
someone else Android their ad stack all
bought from someone else um videos
YouTube you know they had a video
service Google videos it sucked no one
wanted to use it it crashed and burned
they just bought someone else's
successful idea server management
customer service Google Docs Maps ways
you name it right even the satellite
views it's all companies they bought
Google was able to tap into the capital
markets and was able to exploit a a long
period of sort of comos antitrust where
Regulators didn't care if companies
bought their competitors whether large
or nent and so they allowed them to grow
through this acquisition and so Google
while it Styles itself as a making
things company is really a buying things
company um Google was also able to
leverage all the money it made by buying
out all its competitors and not having
its margins eroded by having to fight
with these competitors it was able to
leverage that into a giant War chest
that it used to stop anyone from doing
unto Google what Google had done unto
all those search engines that were
around when Google started like Yahoo
and asjes and and alista which is to say
to come up with a better idea for search
a better way to to organize the web and
therefore um uh put it out of business
and the way that it did this was by
making sure that you never used a search
engine that wasn't Google anywhere that
there was a search box uh whether that
was on your iPhone which is made by
Google's largest mobile rival or in a
browser including you know
Firefox uh a Samsung Galaxy anywhere
there's a search engine Google bought uh
that search box they made sure that they
were the default they spent upwards of
$20 billion a year on this so the single
largest expenditure that Google makes
single largest uh check that Apple
received
is the annual bribe it gets for not
letting you uh showing you another
search engine when you turn on your
iPhone and as a result no one funded
search development in a serious way
there was there was um Microsoft Bing
right so one other giant tech company
tried to get in on it but for the most
part investors and technologists
understood that it didn't matter how
good your search engine is if no one
gets to use it and no one was going to
use it so this is the the crime that
Google was just convicting victed of you
know the the end of um uh antitrust coma
is at hand antitrust is awake and it's
kicking ass and the Department of
Justice did just convict Google of being
a monopolis on the basis of it having
engaged in this conduct uh and and so
don't take my word for it this this was
Google's way of maintaining an illegal
Monopoly and one of the things about
this Monopoly is that when it has um
control of the market right when it
looks around at all the land it has
conquered it Weeps because there is no
more land to conquer Google can't grow
by um finding new people to use a search
engine it can't grow by finding new
people who haven't thought about using
Google for advertising um it can't grow
by uh any of the things that it had been
successful at doing it had to grow by
making more money out of the lines of
business that it already had and for
Google growth was really important and I
know as uh leftists which I count myself
as um we have a kind of
reflexive uh distaste for the idea of
firms that continue to grow you know we
say things like the only ideology that
uh says that uh continued growth is is
without limit is always possible is the
ideology of cancer uh and so on but
there's a there's a reason Beyond
ideology that companies like Google want
to grow right if you're
Google your biggest expenditure after
bribing Apple every year is paying all
your
engineers and and um Google paid its
Engineers quite well uh because there
was a labor shortage in Tech until about
two years ago and so even though there's
very little Union density in tech tech
workers got paid extraordinarily well uh
and so um Google can pay those Engineers
with two different forms of compensation
so it can pay them money but money is
hard for Google to get Google only gets
money when um a company buys something
from it uh but Google has something else
it can use to pay Engineers which is
stock and um Google has as much stock as
it needs Google makes new Google stock
by typing numbers into a
spreadsheet and uh Engineers will
happily accept this thing that Google
can make by typing numbers into a
spreadsheet instead of money for the
bulk of their
compensation provided that the share
price is going up and the share price
Gres up when the market sees growth and
so for Google this is not just you know
the ideology of cancer we have to
understand that like there's like a a
rational material reason you know as a
leftist I'm a materialist too there's a
rational material reason why Google is
uh trying to grow all the time and it's
trying to grow all the time so that it
can um pay its its workers in Funny
Money uh instead of actual money that is
hard to get and so Google searched to
squeeze and it reaches this juncture
that we found out about through the
Google versus doj case where a bunch of
Google's internal memos were released
and and Google like every tech company
has a uh um a literary culture instead
of an oral culture uh the majority of
Google's Communications and planning
take the form of memos uh which you
might call emails or direct messages or
whatever uh but but which are um uh
understood you know in the historic
context as just another form of memo
like a telegram or what anything else
you would use to analyze the conduct of
a group of people that kept notes on
what they were doing and so we got all
these things that were entered into the
record as a result of the case and um
guy named ed zitron uh who's a a great
uh uh uh sort of corporate researcher uh
who runs a good newsletter called
where's your Ed at uh Ed uh started
combing through these documents as did
lots of other people and Ed hit a very
interesting seam about um that that a
lot of light on what happened to to
Google and the old good Google which was
uh something that happened in 2019 when
when Google's growth from um search had
really slowed down and remember every
time you search Google they show you
some ads and they make some money and so
uh Google's growth from search had
really slowed down people were searching
Google for all the things they were
interested in the number of people who
used Google had stayed pretty much
constant because it was basically
everyone and uh the um number of
Searchers they were doing was basically
constant because they were searching for
everything they were interested in and
so Google couldn't grow by making more
people use search nor could it grow by
making people interested in more
subjects that they ended up searching on
Google had to grow by finding a way to
make more money from search and that's
where this epic fight that Ed surfaced
came from and it's a fight between two
Google uh uh Executives one's a guy
called Ben Gomes or Gomez I don't know
goes he was uh formerly was Google
search zar uh but he was someone who was
a veteran of the company in 2019 he'd
been with the company since uh 2000 for
19 years and he had um built out their
server infrastructure from like
literally a couple of computers under a
desk at Stanford to these data centers
you see all over the world and and Gomes
from the literary record we see the The
Palms that we get from the the court
documents really wanted search to be
good and he was part of a cohort of
googlers who really cared about search
quality
his rival was a relatively new uh Google
executive a guy named prakar ragavan
excuse me if I if I mispronounce his
name uh ragavan had started as a a
McKenzie consultant but moved from there
to Yahoo which you remember is the
company that Google destroyed with a
superior search engine ragavan had
actually been in charge of Yahoo's
search in a period when it declined in
market share from about 90% to 0% and
then shut down and and he was hired by
Google to figure out how to make more
money out of
search and um in the in the paper record
what you see is ragavan and Gomes
arguing and ragavan is hit on this great
strategy for how to make more money from
search he says look if search was less
reliable right if when you searched you
didn't find what you were looking for on
the first query and had to refine your
query a couple of times well then say we
made everyone search twice for the stuff
that they were looking for once before
that doubles our search traffic right
doubles our search traffic and that will
double our revenue from advertising so
first
approximation and um so there's this
epic fight within Google about what's
going to happen here are they going to
um well to use a word that I coined in
shifi search or are they going to make
search as good as they could and they
decide that they're going to inchid ify
search d d d
and that is why Google sucks right
that's why Google has sucked since 2019
is they have a revenue strategy that
says the harder it is to find things
with Google the more advertising money
they make because the more you have to
search now Google obviously could have
done this at any time um even when they
were growing by signing up new users or
by finding new things to index so that
people who had questions would ask them
of Google they could have also made
Google search worse right so in it if in
it in addition to growing by you know
adding a million users a day they also
made each user of the service search
twice for things that they could deliver
with one query they still could have
doubled the revenue so it's not like
Google wasn't interested in money before
2019 the question is why did they do it
in 2019 and I think that the answer to
that is the key to understanding what
happened to the old good the old good
web and what we need to do to make a new
good web and so I mentioned this term in
shid ification that I coined um I've had
lots of other words for how the internet
got worse uh none of them were as uh
successful as in shid ification people
just love cussing uh and so I I'll use
that word here and and you know I
describe inchid ification as a process
that can be observed from the outside
and from the inside from the outside you
have firms that start off as being good
to their end users these firms on the
internet they're mostly platforms a
platform is a is a service that has end
users and business customers so Uber has
like drivers and Riders and Amazon has
you know Publishers and readers say or
or people who make things and people who
buy things um Spotify has musicians and
listeners and so on so a platform
two-sided Market business customers on
one side end users on the other and the
platform starts off by being quite good
to its end users so here we are Google
gives you a search that is so good
you're like this is
sorcery and then it finds a way to lock
those users in so here we have have
Google you know buying all of its
competitors making sure that there's no
search boxes anywhere on the internet so
even if you do get sick of Google
there's nowhere else to go and as it
makes things uh as it locks those users
in it starts to make things better for
business customers so the amount of
advertising on Google grows the amount
of surveillance Google does grows uh the
degree to which Google locks you into
its platform so if you're using Gmail
it's very hard to get away from using
the other services that integrate with
Gmail um you know to link a document in
a in a Google Calendar uh event you have
to use Google Drive and so on and so on
uh and so um uh Google makes things
worse for their end users they make
things better for business customers
Publishers and advertisers like how
Google is going but then it locks in
those business customers makes things
worse for everyone and so you know today
you know if you're a publisher that
publishes high quality material Google
won't find it Google will only uh put
that at the top of the search if you pay
them to right you have to you have to
turn your website that would
historically have been at the top of a
Google search result because it was the
right website to answer someone's
question you have to turn it into an ad
you have to pay Google to answer someone
else's question correctly and then the
service turns into a pile of that's
in ification in three stages good
to users then uh good to end uh then
good to business customers and then good
to themselves uh and we see that pattern
all over the place and to understand why
that pattern is going on you need to
look inside the company what is it that
that stops companies from in shid toying
and what was it that allowed companies
to start in shid toying so companies are
historically uh tech companies anyways
are historically disciplined by four
forces that stop them from inid ifying
um the first is competition right when
when there were a lot of search engines
Google had to be the best search engine
I actually uh saw um Sergey Brin one of
the founders of Google speaking at a
conference around uh 2 2001 where he
said like we are kept up at Night by the
fact that you can change search engines
with one click and that anyone could do
to us what uh we did to ask geves to to
yahooo and so on um so you have to worry
about competition when you're worried
about competition you have to be as good
as possible because otherwise someone
will be better than you you have to
worry about regulation so um when you
are small especially it's very hard for
you to resist a regulator uh and um
Regulators can come and smack you around
so you have to you have to worry that a
regulator is going to say for example
that scraping the web is not allowed
right that was how Google created its
search index as did everyone who came
before them or you know more importantly
in the case of Google you have to worry
that someone's going to start to look at
Privacy Law um so Google obviously uh
transitioned at one point from being a
company grounded in providing good
search to a company grounded in spying
on you and providing good search and uh
it's interesting because if you read the
original paper that um brenn and uh um
uh sorry I've just blanked his name
Brennan paage wrote in 1998 the the page
rank paper where they describe Google
they say now the one thing you really
can't do is like be an advertising and
surveillance driven company if you want
to be a good search engine because
you're going to get wrecked it's gonna
you're going to have conflicting
imperatives and this is going to be
terrible uh and we see how that worked
out so lucky for Google there hasn't
been any new Privacy Law in the United
States since 1988 that's the last time
that Congress passed a new federal
Privacy Law uh and um that law it's not
a very good law it's a law that makes it
illegal for video store clerks to tell
the newspapers which VHS cassettes you
took home it's called the video privacy
protection act and so with no movement
on privacy since 1988 Google can run
rampant in the United States obviously
in the EU you have the gdpr which in
theory would be a really great Privacy
Law but here again um Google doesn't
have to worry about it once it got big
enough because that Privacy Law would be
enforced in Ireland where Google
pretends it's headquartered and Ireland
is a crime Haven because uh every
country that's a tax Haven has to be a
crime Haven otherwise the countries that
are companies that use it as a tax Haven
will go somewhere else so you know
Ireland is uh locked in a race to the
bottom on uh regulatory enforcement with
Cypress and Malta and and uh Luxembourg
and and to a lesser extent the
Netherlands um Google also uh would have
had to worry historically about merger
scrutiny so until the 1980s uh buying
other companies that uh in order to
reduce competition was a pretty big no
no uh and uh it wasn't until we decided
to stop enforcing antitrust that that
was a problem so Google um when it was
small could have been disciplined by
these but it wasn't wasn't disciplined
by privacy and it wasn't disciplined by
by merger scrutiny or other antitrust
law um but one other thing that that um
Google had to worry about from the early
years was
interoperability that's something that
is like built into every digital tool
it's it's just a kind of feature
underlying how digital tools work that
there's really only one kind of computer
we know how to make it's something
called the touring complete Von noyman
machine just means that it can run every
computer can run every program that we
know how to write and what that means is
that um if Google does something that um
uh you don't like to a product you're
using right if they you know in shifi
Gmail or Android or whatever someone can
write a program that undo that uh and so
you know if you think about say ads more
than half of all internet users have
installed an ad blocker in their web
browser uh and what that means is that
whenever there is a product meeting
where someone says hey let's make the
ads in our website more obnoxious
someone's going to say Hey you know if
you do that you're going to drive our
users to install ad blockers and when
you do that the revenue from that user
is going to drop to zero because they're
never going to uninstall that ad blocker
and so whatever plan you have for making
the ads more obnoxious whatever Revenue
you think you're going to get we have to
measure that against the expected losses
from losing our contact with the user
altoe um and so uh Google was also
disciplined by by interop and then as I
said Google was dis disciplined by its
Workforce because uh Engineers were in
short supply Tech workers were in short
supply they weren't Union that they've
got terribly low Union density but they
are still the princes of Labor in the
sense that there's so much competition
for Tech workers historically that Tech
workers could really write their own
ticket uh and um you know interestingly
enough the way that that cashed out in
the kind of class struggle between Tech
workers and their bosses is that their
bosses said uh look we're we're like you
um you know you're not really a worker
you're a temporarily embarrassed founder
and you have a vision and you have a
vision for uh a world that is better
because of digitization so you know
Facebook says we're going to connect the
world uh Google says we're going to um
organize the world's information and
make it useful uh and you know that
wasn't just hot air it was something
that Tech workers uh many of them
anyways were really excited about it was
a mission that they believed in they
thought that they could make the world
better with tech I don't think they were
wrong to think that I think there are
ways that we can use technology to make
our lives profoundly better
um David and I met on a couple of
occasions face to face but mostly our
interactions were mediated through
digital technology uh my life is better
for it and so there are lots of ways
that that you can improve the world with
digital technology and reasons that
people um believed in that mission um
now appealing to someone's sense of
mission actually has a name there's a
librarian called fasi etar and she calls
it vocational awe when you convince
someone that their work matters it makes
them vulnerable to
exploitation uh you see this with
doctors and nurses and teachers and um
other people who are kind of uh inv
vagled into enduring terrible working
conditions in order to uh to fulfill
this this sense of Duty that they have
Elon Musk calls it being extremely
hardcore uh and so Tech bosses were able
to trigger this extremely hardcore mode
in their workers by appealing to the
sense of mission they had um and so long
as they were willing to sort of spend
relatively small dollars on converting
the tech workplace into a kind of
whimsical campus where you had like free
meals and massages and daycare and dry
cleaning and a gym and so on workers
would just stay at the at the job right
they show up at 6:00 in the morning eat
the free breakfast go to work work all
day eat the free dinner uh maybe you
know do a workout in the company gym
come back and work till late then get on
the company luxury bus log into the
company Wi-Fi and work all the way home
right so for for Google this was a great
strategy uh in terms of how it worked
but how it failed was different because
the tech Workforce in those days well
they were uh fiercely protective of the
things that they made you know and that
comes along with the bargain right if
you've missed your mother's funeral to
ship a product on time and your boss
says all right well we're going to Goose
the amount of AD Revenue by 2% by making
this product 20% worse you're going to
experience like a very profound sense of
moral injury and say hell no I'm not
going to do that right and you can't
make me because the guy cross the street
is going to pay me as much as you do if
not more and if I quit uh you can't find
anyone else to do this job and so
workers were able to hold the line I
think that's why Google did not do all
the stuff that it's done since 2019
before
2019 so what happened well we did didn't
enforce competition law Google was able
to buy all of its competitors once
Google and the uh other large Tech firms
had merged to Monopoly once they' formed
a cartel they found it very easy to
capture their Regulators right it's not
an accident that Ireland is a tax Haven
it's not an accident that Congress
hasn't passed a new Privacy Law when a
sector is extremely concentrated it's
really easy for them to agree on what to
say and how they're going to relate to
the state and to its regulate regulatory
operat stat us and we think of Google as
being like say bitter enemies with
companies like apple or Facebook right
these are great Rivals you look at the
actual like SE suite and the roster it's
everyone's worked everywhere you know
Facebook's defining coo was a Google
executive named Cheryl Sandberg right
these people are not the monu and the
capulets they are you know Pals uh and
when there's only five companies in the
sector everyone who's a serious decision
maker maker in that company has worked
with all the other serious decision
makers and all the Rival companies you
know and they're Executives to one
another's Estates and they are godp
parents to one another's children they
are bridesmaids and groomsmen at one
another's weddings uh they play on the
same um you know football uh League or
softball league uh their kids play
together and what you end up with is um
sometimes uh an explicit but always a
tacit conspiracy to con Verge on a
single ideology as to how those
companies should relate to the state and
because they've carved up the market
like you know the pope carving up the
new world they don't have to compete
directly with one another you know
Facebook's doing social Google's doing
search Apple's got the you know stuff
Apple's got and they're you know they're
not doing a search engine uh and as a
result they don't have to face what uh
Peter teal it's one of the PayPal Mafia
calls wasteful competition and so as a
result they have a lot of money to spend
to take that consensus about how they
should be regulated and use it to
capture The Regulators which is what
they did um one of the aspects of
regulatory
capture is that uh it allows you not
just to keep regulations from being
forced against you but also to hijack
the state to enforce regulations against
people who want to crush you and so um
everyone who wants to rival Google or in
the other big Tech firms finds thems in
violation of some IP law or another so
Google scraped the whole web scrape
Google today and they'll turn you into a
radioactive crater um you know more than
half of the internet has installed a an
ad blocker but no one's ever St
installed an ad blocker for their apps
because apps can't be modified without a
reverse engineering step that involves
bypassing encryption and that's illegal
under uh an American Copyright Act
called the Digital Millennium Copyright
Act and in Europe under uh article six
of the European copyright dirve 2001 and
so you have um um uh this kind of
prohibition on modifying their products
and services so if they do something
that makes the product suck
interoperability can't make it unsuck uh
Jay Freeman from the um the cdia project
he calls this felony contemp to business
model you know this business of wrapping
up a service in the right kind of Ip so
that it becomes a crime to do things
with that product or service that the
shareholders don't want you to do even
if Parliament or Congress has never said
you're not allowed to do it and then
there was the workforce right the the
workforce has uh
historically um uh has historically held
inch ification off because of its
scarcity but you know scarcity is not a
durable source of Labor power labor
power arises from um uh solidarity right
because scarcity can go away but
solidarity is something that can be
quite durable uh and without
unionization the tech sector was only as
strong as it was scarce and it's not
scarce anymore in 2023 the tech sector
in the United States fired 260,000
workers in the first two quarters of
2024 was 100,000 more and it's still
going on and that is um how you stop
workers from telling uh people telling
their bosses go yourself I'm not
going to wreck this product because uh
they know that there's out there who
will do their job if they quit and they
know that there's no one else who will
give them a job if they quit so I think
you know the way to understand what's
happened to Google is that Google's kind
of a it's kind of a body and it has
these forces within it some of whom want
to inchid ify things and some of whom
resist inchid ification and they're
locked in a kind of dialectical struggle
between these conflicting imperatives
and you know the the way that that uh is
embod
is that behind the CEO's desk at Google
is a giant lever labeled in
ification and remember that for most of
Google's history it's CEOs have not been
its cuddly Founders who've gotten
progressively less cuddly as the years
gone by it was Eric Schmidt who's an
odious creep who's been inv involved
with the US military-industrial complex
for years and years and then it was next
McKenzie I and every day the CEO gets up
and behind his desk there's a giant
lever lab labeled inch ification the
first thing he does to inaugurate his
day is pulls on that in ification lever
as hard as he can but for most of
Google's
history that lever didn't move because
it was gummed up by competition by
regulation by interoperability and by
the workforce and the erosion of those
four forces ending with the collapse of
worker power in the tech sector is why
Google in
2019 had this dialectical conflict
between the guy who'd been in charge of
search for 19 years and the guy who
thought that the way to make Google grow
was to make search worse and that guy
won
there were guys like that in Google from
day one right look at Cheryl Sandberg
not all of them were guys obviously look
at Cheryl Sandberg and what she did to
Facebook right they just lost the
argument they lost the argument because
the battle was fought on terrain that
was tilted against in shid ification
because of these forces that held in
shid ification at Bay so
today we are we are living in the
consequence of the failure to discipline
these firms these firms that are made of
imperfect vessel
that are complex institutions that are
anthropologically very rich um my friend
Bea Coleman has done excellent work on
on Tech workers in the free software
movement uh as an anthropologist
specializing in ethnography uh and her
work I I really recommend to you uh
Gabriella Coleman uh if you like um
David's work and you want to see his
methods applied to Tech workers uh and
and what we see now uh as the um
uh as inchid ification is hit kind of
rock bottom is a Resurgence of people
who are interested in making a new good
internet uh and uh the new good internet
is one that has all of the technological
self-determination of the old good
internet uh an Internet that um where
even the people who want to harm you or
lock you in or exploit you just struggle
as a technical matter to do that because
of the way that the system is set up um
but that has the ease of use that we got
with Web 2.0 when all of our friends who
weren't technical enough to use the
internet join the party which was great
it was I don't think we could have had
occupy without that Web 2.0 the bosses
who built those Web 2.0 companies who
morphed into the inchid toying monopolis
of the internet they want to tell you
that these things are inseparable that
you cannot have an easy internet that
normal people can use without um also
having an internet
that is uh um optimized for this kind of
exploitation and I think that this is a
a familiar maneuver among reactionary
forces this is just another variation of
Margaret Thatcher saying there is no
alternative if you want to have a high
tech civilization where people can come
together from all around the world for
something like occupy or to read David's
books or to do any of the other things
that you value about the internet to
make silly videos on Tik Tok which which
is not the problem with Tik Tok the
problem with Tik Tok is not the silly
videos right it's the spying um that if
if you want to do that that that you you
have to just accept all the bad stuff
that comes with the good that these
can't be disentangled and it's a
self-serving
lie uh and um I think that we are living
through a quite hopeful moment for
making a new good internet um we have
seen a Resurgence of trust busting of of
competition law enforcement all around
the world
uh it's happening in the UK with the
competition markets Authority and
especially its digital markets unit
which is the largest technical uh
antitrust unit in the world 70 full-time
Engineers working on that the United
States the last four years have been
unparalleled we've seen more in four
years than we saw in the 40 years that
preceded it on uh antitrust enforcement
uh and that has included blocking very
large mergers and and now were at the
verge of breaking up Google uh as well
as Prosecuting all kinds of sleazy
behavior and and making new regulations
we're seeing it in the EU obviously
where we have the digital markets Act
and the Digital Services act we see it
in Australia South Korea Japan you know
it's interesting some of the smaller
countries either small in population or
geographically or both have been doing
some excellent work on antitrust in part
because the tech Giants do the same
thing in every country they operate in
so once the EU tears apart Apple's App
Store Racket and finds apple and creates
a case against them and wins that case
it's a matter of public record how Apple
breaks the law and so this is how South
Korea and Japan went after Apple they
just translated the cases into the local
language and did a little bit of
rewriting to fit it into the local legal
Frameworks and uh they were able to go
after Apple there too so you're seeing
this coordinated enforcement in Canada
where I'm from um we're actually seeing
movement on competition for the first
time in a in a very very long time uh so
Canada has a competition law the
competition act and until this year it
didn't have uh something called the
abuse of dominance standard which is the
thing that allows the competition
regulator to punish a company for
abusing its dominance right this is like
having a criminal code that doesn't have
a murder charge in it and so finally I
know it's a baby step but we finally got
uh an Abus of dominance standard in our
competition law so we're seeing a lot of
movement on on trust buting we're also
seeing re-regulation so we see the
digital markets Act and the Digital
Services act uh in the United States
there's finally movement on privacy
after as I say no movement since 1988
and in part that's because the Coalition
around privacy is very large people
don't necessarily know that they care
about privacy but when you explain it to
them they're like you're right I do care
about privacy because if you think that
the problem with the world is that your
grandparents were turned into a q andon
by Facebook or that your kid was made
into an uh an anorexic by Instagram or
that Tik Tok Brainwashed the Millennials
in your life into quoting Osama bin
or you know if you're worried that like
all the black lives matter protesters
got rounded up with reverse warrants
that were served on Google to enumerate
the identities of everyone at the
protest or that it happened to the
January 6 riers or that people of color
are being denied loans and mortgages and
jobs because of how they've been
racially profiled by these automated uh
um sorting algorithms decision support
algorithms or if you're worried about AI
deep fake porn of yourself circulating
online well then you know you are
worried about privacy you don't don't
recognize it but that's the common
threat around all of them if we
muscularly regulated privacy most of the
other stuff basically dies on the vine
and so we're getting real big coalitions
around privacy interoperability is
popping up through things like uh right
to repair bills and in the digital
markets act on mandates on tech
companies that they open up gateways so
that other people can leave the platform
but not leave the people that matter to
them so you're going to be able to leave
Facebook and go to Mastadon or blue sky
or any other service and still stay in
touch with the people that you know are
keeping you on Facebook because you love
them more than you hate Mark Zuckerberg
you won't have to choose and then
finally we are seeing Tech workers wake
up and realize that they aren't
temporarily embarrassed Founders that
they're workers and that the future is
here it's not evenly distributed and if
you want to see what the future of a
tech company looks like look at what it
does to the workers that it doesn't have
to Value because of their scarcity so if
you want to know what your future looks
like as an Amazon coder look at an
Amazon warehouse worker right someone
pissing in a bottle someone whose body
is used up at twice the rate of any of
the competitors in the warehousing
sector right Jeff Bezos doesn't treat
his Tech workers well because he loves
them and hates uh warehouse workers he
treats them well because he can't
replace them if they quit and if he can
we know how they're going to treat them
you know the future is here it's not
evenly distributed but it's pulled up
thick around the ankles of Amazon on
warehouse workers and drivers and so we
are seeing historic rises in uh labor
organizing and activism among Tech
workers uh we're seeing Tech solidarity
the tech workers Coalition and other
groups that are transnational uh trans
firm and that are um making big strides
in unionizing Tech workplaces now in
midal they're starting from somewhere
very small so it doesn't take much to
double the density of tech worker Union
uh membership but they're part of a much
wider trend of Labor organizing and so
they're drafting on that to a certain
extent and so you know David he says
there isn't there wasn't a West right he
says that it's revisionist history and I
think that there is a kind of
revisionist history about the old good
internet that says that it was perfect
or that it never existed at all the
reality is that the old good internet
like the New Deal like the welfare state
after the war in Europe and and in the
United Kingdom was imperfect it was
incomplete
but its problem wasn't that um we tried
to make something that was oriented
towards human thriving problem was that
we didn't go far
enough and there are people today who
oppose the New Deal on the post-war
Social Security consensus on the grounds
that you should starve if you don't have
a job that you should have no protection
from your boss that nobody should have a
vote except for people who own land
right those people don't aren't upset
with a new deal for the same reason you
are if the reason you're upset with the
New Deal is that it didn't extend the
vote to enough people that it wasn't uh
uh that it didn't uh recognize racial
Injustice that it didn't think about
gender or have these other parts of
analysis that that it it didn't think
about uh indigenous issues those people
don't want to build a new deal that
encompasses all of those groups those
people want to take away the New Deal
from the groups that it was extended to
and so so I hope that you'll join me in
thinking about and promoting the idea of
a new good internet to say that there is
an alternative that Margaret Thatcher as
always was wrong that there is an
alternative and that that alternative is
worth having thank you